Update episode file format (#18)
esciencecenter-digital-skills/Lesson-FAIR-Data-Climate: _episodes/format.md

teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What is a file format?"
- "What file formats should I use?"
objectives:
- "Name common formats used in climate-related domains."
- "Understand different types of data."
- "Choose correct file formats for your work."

keypoints:
- "Choose formats that are common to your field/community to ensure the interoperability and reusability of your data."
- "Make sure that the file formats you choose can hold the necessary data elements and information."
- "Decide on how long do you intend to preserve your data."
- "Make sure to check requirements of the repository where data is stored."
---

## File format

> A [file format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_format) is the structure of a file.

Reviewer: This section is a bit short, and as an answer to the episode question 'what is a file format', I think it's a bit superficial. This is information is probably not new for the target audience. 

Perhaps we could add some more in depth info. For example, why would one want to use JPG and not PNG or GIF or RAW... All file formats are used to store image data, but they have differences in compression, available colors, resulting filesize, etc. See e.g. here: https://fixthephoto.com/tech-tips/difference-between-jpeg-and-png.html

Author: I added more text to this section.

This is a good example that is now added. However, the link is too technical, thinks so. It is also added to the text

It determines how the data within the file is organized.

> A File format is also called a file extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A file format is also called a file extension.
```

> A File format is also called a file extension.

Reviewer: According to the wikipedia page you linked, the filename extension is *used* to infer the file format. But I wouldn't say they are the same thing.

Author: The line is removed.

Files are usually named as `filename.format`.
For example, climate.jpeg is a file named climate with [jpeg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JPEG) format.
You might know that `jpeg` is a commonly used format for digital images.

> Therefore, the file `climate` is an image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the file `climate` is probably an image.
```
See the second paragraph under 'usage' [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filename_extension#Usage), it states that on unix systems usually this suffix is ignored when reading a file. So it's mostly intended for the user of the file. But for many files on linux, and can probably change or remove the extension, and the right programs can still read the file.

Author: Agree, I added a callout to explain this.

## Common file format in climate-related domains

> In climate-related domains e.g. weather and climate science, Earth observation science, hydrology,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In climate-related domains e.g. weather and climate science, earth observation science, hydrology,
```

data can be in many types and for different purposes.

> In this section, we will learn about the common formats of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will explore some common data formats.
```
I'd be careful with stating that 'we will learn'. Personally I feel that sounds a bit derogatory.

Author: > Hey @SarahAlidoost thanks for adding this, that's a great start!
> 
> I have a number of suggestions, mostly small. Overall, I wonder if it would be better to move some of the exercises about choosing a data format and assessing whether it helps to make the data FAIR, more to the end of the episode. Now you're first doing this (with the implicit assumption that you're choosing this format to _publish_ the data), and then at the end you state that different formats may be more suitable during the evaluation phase e.g.

@Peter9192 thank you for the comments, very helpful. The text is revised now. Please see my comments as well. 

The exercises are related to its own section especially those **bold** text in the section. The approach that I took is as: first, some material is introduced, next, the user is challenged. Therefore, it does not make sense to move them to the end of the episode. To address your concern, we can remove them. Also, see my comment on acceptable and recommended formats.

I am also thinking about adding a nice figure to this lesson. I will make a new PR when I found something.

> ## Common file format for geospatial data in your community/research team
>

> > You work with some data for a project in your community.

Reviewer: Let's link this to the previous episodes :-)
```suggestion
> Here are some questions about the use case you chose in the introduction.
```

  Variables are N-dimensional arrays of **data**, with a name.

  - The coordinates information are stored as netCDF dimensions.
  Dimensions have a length and a name.

  - A scientist also wants to store supporting information or **metadata**, such as the units, or
  some information about how the data were produced.
  The metadata is stored as netCDF attributes that are always single values or one-dimensional arrays.

> ## Why NetCDF format
>
> You work with some geospatial data for a project in your community.
> You choose the NetCDF format for the data.
> Your colleague asks:
>
> 1. Why did you choose the NetCDF format?
> 2. Does this format help to make the data FAIR?
>
>> ## Solution
>>
>> 1. You found that NetCDF format is the standard in your research community and
>> therefore interoperable and reusable for anyone.
>> Also, the NetCDF format can contain both data and metadata.
>>
>> 2. Therefore, yes, the NetCDF format helps to make the data FAIR.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

- [GRIB](https://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/www/DPS/FM92-GRIB2-11-2003.pdf):
  GRIB stands for general regularly-distributed information in binary.

>   It is **commonly used** by the [World Meteorological Organization](https://public.wmo.int/en)(WMO) for weather model data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It is **commonly used** by the [World Meteorological Organization](https://public.wmo.int/en) (WMO) for weather model data.
```

>   - GRIB coded data consist of a continuous bit-stream made of a sequence of

Reviewer: This is quite technical. Can we explain that with a figure or so?

Author: agree, I removed it, not really needed. The concept is beyond the scope of the lesson.

  [octets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Octet_(computing)).
  Thus, the representation of the data is **independent of** any particular machine representation.

  - GRIB messages contain the **data** and **metadata**.

> ## Why GRIB format
>
> You work with some geospatial data for a project in your community.
> You choose the GRIB format for the data.
> Your colleague asks:
>
> 1. Why did you choose the GRIB format?
> 2. Does this format help to make the data FAIR?
>
>> ## Solution
>>
>> 1. You found that GRIB format is the standard in your research community and
>> therefore interoperable and reusable for anyone.
>> GRIB format is independent of any particular machine representation.
>> Also, the GRIB format can contain both data and metadata.
>>

> >> 2. Therefore, yes, the GRIB format helps to make the data FAIR.

Reviewer: Although GRIB has long been the de facto WMO standard, I think the community is now moving away from it in many places. I *think* that is because netCDF is a more user-friendly (and maybe almost just as performant) alternative. So I would be careful to 'recommend' GRIB in this tutorial.

Author: I added an example of using the grib format to the text. We should be careful that "user-friendly" is not a measure that makes the data fair. At least I didn't see that FAIR resources refer to this. Also, I noticed that some resources provide two lists of formats: acceptable and recommended. Based on what we discussed, I am careful to not reject or ignore other commonly used formats in different communities.

Reviewer: Well, actually I would argue that user-friendliness is an integral part of FAIR. I like to interpret the 'strive for FAIR data' as an endeavor to lower the barriers or thresholds for re-use by others. From that point of view, the easier it is for others to work with your data, the 'FAIRer' it is.

  - GeoTIFF format is suitable for a **wide range of applications worldwide**.
  For example, satellite imaging systems, scanned aerial photography, scanned maps,
  digital elevation models, or as a result of geographic analyses.

  - It is **independent** of a computer’s architecture, operating system, and graphics hardware.

  - GeoTIFF format has a three-level hierarchy: file header, image file directories, and **data**.

  - GeoTIFF format stores a **broad range of georeferencing information**, catering to geographic
  as well as projected coordinate systems.

> ## Why GeoTIFF format
>
> You work with some geospatial data for a project in your community.
> You choose the GeoTIFF format for the data.
> Your colleague asks:
>
> 1. Why did you choose the GeoTIFF format?
> 2. Does this format help to make the data FAIR?
>
>> ## Solution
>>
>> 1. You found that GeoTIFF format is the standard in your research community and
>> therefore interoperable and reusable for anyone.
>> GeoTIFF format is independent of computer’s architecture, operating system, and graphics hardware.
>> Also, the GeoTIFF format can contain both data and geographic information.
>>

> >> 2. Therefore, yes, the GeoTIFF format helps to make the data FAIR.

Reviewer: Maybe it would be nice to also show some examples of data that don't help to make the data FAIR. Aren't there like arcgis native file formats or so?

Author: I disagree to add formats that have too many disadvantages. It will be confusing. 
Actually, ArcGIS is one of the gis applications. GeoTIFF can be used by many gis applications.
I added an example of using the GeoTIFF format to the text.

> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

- [HDF5](https://support.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/doc1.6/UG/03_Model.html):
The Hierarchical Data Format Version 5, (HDF5) implements a model for managing and storing data,
developed by the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA):
![HDF5]({{ page.root }}/fig/hdf5_data_model.png)

  - HDF5 is a **general-purpose**, **machine-independent** standard for storing scientific data in files.

  - HDF5 files are organized in a hierarchical structure, with two primary structures: groups and datasets.

  - HDF5 dataset: a multidimensional array of **data** elements, together with supporting **metadata**.

  - There are four essential classes of metadata: name, datatype, dataspace, and storage layout.

  - An HDF5 structure is **self-describing**, allowing an application to interpret
  the structure and contents of a file without any outside information.

> ## Why HDF5 format
>
> You work with some geospatial data for a project in your community.
> You choose the HDF5 format for the data.
> Your colleague asks:
>
> 1. Why did you choose the HDF5 format?
> 2. Does this format help to make the data FAIR?
>
>> ## Solution
>>

> >> 1. You found that HDF5 format is the standard in your research community and

Reviewer: Do you have a concrete idea? For I'm not sure I know any (climate-related) community that embraces HDF5

Author: I added an example of using the HDF5 format to the text. I hope that it is concrete enough.

>> therefore interoperable and reusable for anyone.
>> HDF5 is a general-purpose, machine-independent format.
>> Also, HDF5 format can contain both data and metadata.
>>
>> 2. Therefore, yes, HDF5 format helps to make the data FAIR.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Other formats for geospatial data
>
> There are many other formats to store geospatial data like
> [SHP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shapefile)(shapefiles) for vector data,
> [DBF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/.dbf)(database file), and

> > [NetCDF ZARR Data](https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/blogs/developer/en/entry/netcdf-zarr-data-model-specification), etc.

Reviewer: Should we add an exercise to repeat the above questions (why did you choose this, does it help to make FAIR) for their own datasets they chose above?

Author: If I understood it correctly, at the top of the lesson, there is a discussion "Common file format for geospatial data in your community/research team". I am wondering if it addresses your concern.

{: .callout}

## Different formats for different types

There are several data types like geospatial, tabular, storyline, documentation and paper,

> textual, video/audio, and image/figure.
> Recommended formats for different types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
textual, video/audio, and image/figure. Some of them are more in line with the FAIR principles than some others. Here are some recommended formats for different types:
```

It is good to plan in the beginning of your project, what file formats to use for each purpose:

- data collection / processing / analysis,
- reuse: the longer you want to use the data, the more you have to use open, standard and
well-documented file formats to avoid obsolescence.
- preservation: many journals, archives and data repositories require that data are uploaded in certain file formats.
Therefore, you may have to keep some data files in multiple formats.

> ## Non/proprietary format
>
> File formats may be either proprietary or non-proprietary(open or free):
>
>- The proprietary format is owned by a company, or organization or individual.
>  Their specifications are usually not publicly available and the risk of obsolescence is high.
>  If you want to store data in a proprietary format for a reasonable time, consider including a readme.txt file
>  that documents the name and version of the software used to generate the file, as well as
>  the information of the company that made the software.
>
>- The open format is a file format that is published and free to be used by everybody.
{: .callout}

> ## Recommendation about data format
>

> > Recently, researchers evaluated the utility of dynamical downscaling in agricultural impacts projections,

Reviewer: Maybe add a link back to the introduction episode (#14), otherwise we're introducing this dataset again and again in every lesson.

Author: It is added.

- "Understand different types of data."
- "Choose correct file formats for your work."

keypoints:
- "Choose formats that are common to your field/community to ensure the interoperability and reusability of your data."
- "Make sure that the file formats you choose can hold the necessary data elements and information."
- "Decide on how long do you intend to preserve your data."
- "Make sure to check requirements of the repository where data is stored."
---

## File format

A [file format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_format) is the structure of a file.
It determines how the data within the file is organized.
Files are usually named as `filename.format`.
For example, climate.jpeg is a file named climate with [jpeg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JPEG) format.
You might know that `jpeg` is a commonly used format for digital images.
Therefore, the file `climate` is probably an image.

Each file type like images, video, and text can be stored in several formats.
For example, `climate.jpeg`, `climate.png`, and `climate.gif`.
All file formats are used to store image data, but they have differences in
compression, available colors, resulting filesize, etc

> (for more information [see](https://fixthephoto.com/tech-tips/difference-between-jpeg-and-png.html)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(for more information see [this page](https://fixthephoto.com/tech-tips/difference-between-jpeg-and-png.html)).
```

When deciding which one to use, it’s important to note the advantages and disadvantages of each.

Also, formats may be dependent on particular software.
When data is stored from a software program, it is usually saved in that program’s standard file format.
One example is creating tabular data using spreadsheet software.
Tabular data have specific properties that are better supported by the spreadsheet software than a word processor.

> ## no extension or multiple extensions!
>
> In [UNIX-like](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UNIX-like) operating systems, a file can have no extensions,
> or more than one extension.
> For example, in `filename.tar.gz`, the `.tar` indicates that the file is a tar archive of one or more files,
> and the `.gz` indicates that the tar archive file is compressed with [gzip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gzip).
> Also, programs reading files usually ignore the format; it is mostly intended for the human user.
> In Windows, a file should have at least one extension.
{: .callout}

## Common file format in climate-related domains

> In climate-related domains e.g. weather and climate science, earth observation science, hydrology,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In climate-related domains e.g. weather and climate science, earth observation science, or hydrology,
```
